---
title: "Android Q Changes"
description: "Mainly to the build system"
date: 2019-03-16T08:18:41+01:00
slug: android-q-changes
draft: false
---

### sepolicy
`sepolicy` has new `neverallows`.

### ccache
`ccache` is no longer supported by default, the prebuilt `ccache` exec has been
removed.

See [build/core/ccache.mk][ccache-q]:

> We no longer provide a `ccache` prebuilt.
> 
> Ours was old, and had a number of issues that triggered non-reproducible
> results and other failures. Newer ccache versions may fix some of those
> issues, but at the large scale of our build servers, we weren't seeing
> significant performance gains from using `ccache` -- you end up needing very
> good locality and/or very large caches if you're building many different
> configurations.
> 
> Local no-change full rebuilds were showing better results, but why not just
> use incremental builds at that point?
> 
> So if you still want to use `ccache`, continue setting `USE_CCACHE`, but also
> set the `CCACHE_EXEC` environment variable to the path to your ccache
> executable.

Install `ccache` and set `export CCACHE_EXEC=/usr/bin/ccache` in your
`~/.bashrc`.

### Removal of otapackage target
Seems there is no more `make otapackage` on the master branch, though that seems
like a small mistake.
You can still build a flashable zip file via
```
make out/target/product/kagura/aosp_f8331-img-eng.builder.zip
```
Substitute `kagura`, `f8331`, `eng` and `builder` for your actual image name.
On Pie, the image used to be called `aosp_f8331-ota-eng.builder.zip`.

<div class="message">
  <h5>Note</h5>
You will still not receive a flashable <code>.zip</code> file, but rather a
compressed archive with <code>system.img,</code> <code>vendor.img</code> and
<code>boot.img</code> to flash manually.
</div>

## PATH restrictions
```
Disallowed PATH tool "make" used: \
  []string{"make", "-j4", "-j8", "-C", "/home/builder/omni/kernel/sony/msm-4.9/kernel/", \
  "O=../../../../out/target/product/kagura/obj/kernel/msm-4.9", \
  "ARCH=arm64", "CROSS_COMPILE=/home/builder/omni/prebuilts/gcc/linux-x86/aarch64/aarch64-linux-android-4.9/bin/aarch64-linux-android-", \
  "KCFLAGS=-mno-android"}
See https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/+/master/Changes.md#PATH_Tools for more information.
```
Set `export TEMPORARY_DISABLE_PATH_RESTRICTIONS=true` in your build environment
to continue building kernels with GCC.

Add `cc1` back:
```
export PATH=$PATH:/home/builder/omni/prebuilts/gcc/linux-x86/aarch64/aarch64-linux-android-4.9/libexec/gcc/aarch64-linux-android/4.9.x 
```

## New HALs
See: `hardware/interfaces`, `system/hardware/interfaces`,
`hardware/google/interfaces`, `frameworks/hardware/interfaces`.

[ccache-q]: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/+/refs/tags/android-q-preview-1/core/ccache.mk#17
[path-tools]: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/+/master/Changes.md#PATH_Tools
